src/markdown/posts/2021-09-26.md, before:

---
title: Find date for the nth day of a month in Power BI
tech: logo-powerbi
tags: ["Power BI", "Power Query"]
date: 26 September 2021
---

How to use Power Query to find the date for the nth day of a month/year based on another date column (e.g. 3rd Tuesday of October 2021).

In Power BI this can be used for the conditional logic of other Custom Columns. For example, to create indicators that data rows occur on or fall between relative date ranges (e.g. Black Friday sales). The following involves adding a Custom Column in Power Query i.e. M code, not DAX.

This finds the first Monday of the month, where our dependent date column is OurDateField.

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/" & Text.From((7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday)))))
```

![Power Query: 1st Sunday of month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--01.png)

**How it works**

To find the first Sunday of a specific month/year relative to another date, first establish the start of the month e.g. 1/10 (1st October), passing in the date field you are using e.g. [OurDateField], to append its year.

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1")
```

In this example, we are hard-coding October regardless of OurDateField’s month value, but if you need it to be relative to its month too, simply add an extra concatenation for month in the same way year is treated, i.e. using Date.Month().

Now we need to identify what day of the week that this first day of the month is, using Date.DayOfWeek, and setting the optional parameter for what the start of the week is, as Day.Monday

```
Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday)
```

![Power Query: Day of week number](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--02.png)

 
In this example, 1st October 2021 is a Friday, and Friday’s day number is 4 (with Monday being 0).

![Calendar: Weekday of 1st day of month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--03.png)

If you do not provide the Day.Monday parameter, it will default to Day.Monday in the background. If another parameter is used e.g. Day.Sunday, then the assignment numbers will change.

Now we subtract the weekday number 4 from 7, and get 3, which is the first Sunday’s date.

```
7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday))
```

![Power Query: Date of 1st Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--04.png)

Then concatenate this with the year month retrieved earlier

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/" & Text.From((7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday)))))
```

![Power Query: Concatenate the month year to the date](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--05.png)

If you need to change the weekday that Power Query needs to find, simply increment the Day.Monday parameter to the following day of the desired weekday.

For example, if you want to find the first Wednesday, change the parameter to Day.Thursday.

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/" & Text.From((7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Thursday)))))
```

![Power Query: 1st Wednesday of month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--06.png)

![Calendar: 1st Wednesday of the month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--07.png)

If you need to change the position from first, to second, third, or fourth Sunday, simply add 7 for the second, 14 for the third, and 21 for the fourth.

For example, we will retrieve the 3rd Sunday.

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/" & Text.From((7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday)) + 14 )))
```

![Calendar: 3rd Sunday of the month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--08.png)



**Edit: 9th October 2021**

If the last occurrence of a specific day in a month needs to be retrieved, it can possibly be the 4th or 5th instance of that day. Retrieving this may be required for conditional or other custom column dependencies. 

As an example, this Power Query code finds the last Sunday of the month, where our dependent date column is OurDateField.

```
Date.AddDays(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]),(-1 * Number.From(Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Sunday))))
```
![Power Query Day number of last of the month year Day.Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--12.png)

**How it works**

We will try to retrieve the last Sunday of a specific month/year, passing in our relative *OurDateField*.

```
Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField])
```
![Power Query last day of the month year](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--09.png)

Then find out which day of the week it is.

```
Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Monday)
```
![Power Query Day number of last of the month year Day.Monday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--10.png)

In this example, 31st January 2021 is a Sunday, and Sunday’s day number is 6. This is if the optional parameter for start of the week is Day.Monday (which is the default, if not provided).

![Calendar using Day.Monday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--11.png)

Now we will swap that Day.Monday parameter out with Day.Sunday, so that the value for Sunday becomes 0 instead of 6.

```
Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Sunday)
```
![Power Query Day number of last of the month year Day.Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--12.png)

![Calendar using Day.Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--13.png)

We then minus this number from the last date of the month, to get the last Sunday of the month, whih ironically is the same day i.e. Sunday 31/01/2021 - 0 = 31/01/2021. We do this using the Date.AddDays function and multiplying the number with -1.

```
Date.AddDays(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]),(-1 * Number.From(Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Sunday))))
```
![Power Query last date Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--14.png)

Lastly, if you need to pick any other last specific day of the month, just increment by one for each day you want to go earlier in the week e.g. Saturday is +1, Friday is +2 etc.

For example, the last Friday of the month year.

```
Date.AddDays(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]),(-1 * (Number.From(Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Sunday)) + 2)))
```
![Power Query last date Friday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--15.png)

![Power Query last date Friday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--16.png)

Click **[here](https://github.com/makuharistudio/makuharistudio.github.io/blob/main/src/markdown/posts/2021-09-26.md)** for this post's markdown file in GitHub.

Commit message:

Added image to blog post preview
Also added edited images for each blog post preview.
Needed to update every blog post with new image.

src/markdown/posts/2021-09-26.md, after:

---
title: Find date for the nth day of a month in Power BI
tech: logo-powerbi
tags: ["Power BI", "Power Query"]
date: 26 September 2021
photo: ../assets/blog/2021-09-26--00.png
---

How to use Power Query to find the date for the nth day of a month/year based on another date column (e.g. 3rd Tuesday of October 2021).

In Power BI this can be used for the conditional logic of other Custom Columns. For example, to create indicators that data rows occur on or fall between relative date ranges (e.g. Black Friday sales). The following involves adding a Custom Column in Power Query i.e. M code, not DAX.

This finds the first Monday of the month, where our dependent date column is OurDateField.

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/" & Text.From((7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday)))))
```

![Power Query: 1st Sunday of month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--01.png)

**How it works**

To find the first Sunday of a specific month/year relative to another date, first establish the start of the month e.g. 1/10 (1st October), passing in the date field you are using e.g. [OurDateField], to append its year.

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1")
```

In this example, we are hard-coding October regardless of OurDateField’s month value, but if you need it to be relative to its month too, simply add an extra concatenation for month in the same way year is treated, i.e. using Date.Month().

Now we need to identify what day of the week that this first day of the month is, using Date.DayOfWeek, and setting the optional parameter for what the start of the week is, as Day.Monday

```
Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday)
```

![Power Query: Day of week number](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--02.png)

 
In this example, 1st October 2021 is a Friday, and Friday’s day number is 4 (with Monday being 0).

![Calendar: Weekday of 1st day of month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--03.png)

If you do not provide the Day.Monday parameter, it will default to Day.Monday in the background. If another parameter is used e.g. Day.Sunday, then the assignment numbers will change.

Now we subtract the weekday number 4 from 7, and get 3, which is the first Sunday’s date.

```
7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday))
```

![Power Query: Date of 1st Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--04.png)

Then concatenate this with the year month retrieved earlier

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/" & Text.From((7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday)))))
```

![Power Query: Concatenate the month year to the date](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--05.png)

If you need to change the weekday that Power Query needs to find, simply increment the Day.Monday parameter to the following day of the desired weekday.

For example, if you want to find the first Wednesday, change the parameter to Day.Thursday.

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/" & Text.From((7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Thursday)))))
```

![Power Query: 1st Wednesday of month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--06.png)

![Calendar: 1st Wednesday of the month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--07.png)

If you need to change the position from first, to second, third, or fourth Sunday, simply add 7 for the second, 14 for the third, and 21 for the fourth.

For example, we will retrieve the 3rd Sunday.

```
Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/" & Text.From((7 - (Date.DayOfWeek(Date.FromText(Text.From(Date.Year([OurDateField])) & "/10/1"),Day.Monday)) + 14 )))
```

![Calendar: 3rd Sunday of the month](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--08.png)



**Edit: 9th October 2021**

If the last occurrence of a specific day in a month needs to be retrieved, it can possibly be the 4th or 5th instance of that day. Retrieving this may be required for conditional or other custom column dependencies. 

As an example, this Power Query code finds the last Sunday of the month, where our dependent date column is OurDateField.

```
Date.AddDays(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]),(-1 * Number.From(Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Sunday))))
```
![Power Query Day number of last of the month year Day.Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--12.png)

**How it works**

We will try to retrieve the last Sunday of a specific month/year, passing in our relative *OurDateField*.

```
Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField])
```
![Power Query last day of the month year](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--09.png)

Then find out which day of the week it is.

```
Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Monday)
```
![Power Query Day number of last of the month year Day.Monday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--10.png)

In this example, 31st January 2021 is a Sunday, and Sunday’s day number is 6. This is if the optional parameter for start of the week is Day.Monday (which is the default, if not provided).

![Calendar using Day.Monday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--11.png)

Now we will swap that Day.Monday parameter out with Day.Sunday, so that the value for Sunday becomes 0 instead of 6.

```
Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Sunday)
```
![Power Query Day number of last of the month year Day.Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--12.png)

![Calendar using Day.Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--13.png)

We then minus this number from the last date of the month, to get the last Sunday of the month, which ironically is the same day i.e. Sunday 31/01/2021 - 0 = 31/01/2021. We do this using the Date.AddDays function and multiplying the number with -1.

```
Date.AddDays(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]),(-1 * Number.From(Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Sunday))))
```
![Power Query last date Sunday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--14.png)

Lastly, if you need to pick any other last specific day of the month, just increment by one for each day you want to go earlier in the week e.g. Saturday is +1, Friday is +2 etc.

For example, the last Friday of the month year.

```
Date.AddDays(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]),(-1 * (Number.From(Date.DayOfWeek(Date.EndOfMonth([OurDateField]), Day.Sunday)) + 2)))
```
![Power Query last date Friday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--15.png)

![Power Query last date Friday](/src/assets/blog/2021-09-26--16.png)

Click **[here](https://github.com/makuharistudio/makuharistudio.github.io/blob/main/src/markdown/posts/2021-09-26.md)** for this post's markdown file in GitHub.
